To start, I had hoped to work in this quote from
Isaac Asimov. “There is a cult of ignorance in
the United States, and there has always been.
The strain of anti-intellectualism has been a
constant thread winding its way through our
political and cultural life, nurtured by
the false notion that democracy means that ‘my
ignorance is just as good as your knowledge.’”
This quote is from 1980, and it’s been echoed
by other great thinkers like Carl Sagan,
who spoke about the public being unable to
grasp the technology we all use every day,
and having no ability to set their own agenda
or ask the right questions, culminating in a
celebration of ignorance. He said that in 1995.
Even these two could not have foreseen how bad
this has gotten in the 21st century, with people
now questioning the shape of the Earth and the
validity of basic arithmetic. This anti-science
fervor makes us easy to manipulate, because any
contrarian message is bought en masse, no matter
who is telling it or what their motives are. We
are witnessing a multimodal anti-science empire
operating through mass media and legislation,
moving towards state-sanctioned pseudoscience.
And we don’t have to speculate as to how
harmful this can be. We have history to
reflect upon. Persecution of scientists
under Stalin was widespread. Lysenko was
a non-scientist who was promoted to a high
scientific position under Stalin’s regime,
and who convinced Stalin that genetics and
relativity were evil. He denied the existence
of genes. To address agricultural problems,
he promoted a pseudoscientific practice called
vernalization, and millions died of starvation as
a result of crop failures. Scientists who refused
to renounce genetics were left destitute or even
executed. Are we at risk of repeating such events?
Absolutely. Let’s face reality, Trump is going to
win the election. Could he bring a Lysenko-like
figure into his cabinet and begin persecuting
real scientists? Absolutely. Will he try to
expand executive power and abuse his position
to the point of authoritarianism? Probably. And
there are plenty of wealthy people who will help
him try to do that. I won’t go into detail about
Project 2025, but it’s not a conspiracy. It’s a
real plan to move America into the first stages of
Christian theocracy, and it’s already under way.
This is the evil upon our doorstep, and while it
should receive far more attention than people like
Terrence Howard, we should recognize that it’s
all different shades of the same phenomenon.
Anti-science sentiment does not arise out of
thin air. Science is becoming increasingly
more complicated and therefore difficult for
the public to understand, and some people lash
out due to the discomfort this produces. But
more importantly, there are vested interests in
promoting this mentality stemming from Republican
funded think tanks, the deliberate sculpting of a
populace that is not only science illiterate but
actively hostile toward science. Denial of climate
change is in the interest of energy producers.
Denial of basic evolutionary biology is in the
interest of Christian theocrats. These efforts
go all the way up the ladder to figures like
the Koch brothers. I’m not saying Terry is funded
by the Koch brothers, but he rides this prevalent
attitude of reality denial and hostility toward
any form of expertise to this bizarre prominence
that now has people questioning 2nd grade math.
To wield an agenda that is in opposition with
science, one must popularize the notion that
science is wrong and evil. Universities,
the places where you gain knowledge, are evil.
Don’t go there and learn things so that you
figure out how to resist our brainwashing, and
also how to organize and topple our political
structures. Universities are famously places
that stand up against the powers that be,
so they must be demonized. It is a successful
campaign because many people are happy to
have a reason to not learn anything and cling to
primitive beliefs without basis or self-scrutiny.
It goes without saying that religion is a
primary driver of anti-science mentality
because scientific progress, particularly as of
late, has challenged many religious narratives,
such as immaculate divine creation. This triggers
fear of mortality, as their narrative is eroded,
and they lash out in precisely the same
way as one would defend themselves against
physical violence, with hostility and tribalism.
At the same time this is not purely a religious
issue, it has at this point completely
permeated secular politics. I myself am
not a Democrat and I no longer vote Democrat
out of total disillusionment with the party,
as it does not have the best interests of the
American people in mind. But the Republican
party is cartoonishly apocalyptic in comparison.
Know-nothing, proudly stupid, in denial of truly
all science, actively pushing us back into
the dark ages in terms of both ignorance and
authoritarian control by the church. In the wake
of this, to pretend that idiots like Terry should
be given a voice is preposterous. He is not the
culprit but he exacerbates larger trends already
in place. He does not deserve a platform. He is
not part of any legitimate conversation. And most
of the figures with any kind of expertise that
shoe-horn their way into the conversation have
ulterior motives as well, and only serve
to further confuse the public. Like Eric.
So let’s get down to brass tacks. What
is anti-intellectualism at its core?
It boils down to three principles. 1) Religious
anti-rationalism. Essentially emotions over facts.
2) Populist anti-elitism, or the rejection of
intellectual institutions. And 3) Instrumentalism,
the belief that pursuit of knowledge only
serves practical means, namely profit. This
movement intends to halt the acquisition of new
knowledge that would undermine groups with power
and privilege. Misinformation that benefits
those in power is perpetuated, and those
who speak truth to that power are preemptively
character assassinated. The educational sphere
is not completely blameless, admittedly. Part of
the disdain towards academia is fostered by the
increasingly high cost of education. But this is
not in itself a justification for abandoning the
sanctity of centers of knowledge. Corporations
do not have their financial interests challenged
when the public can not even identify
the issues that they are harmed by,
thus perpetuating their own subjugation. We can
historically blame the fossil fuel industry,
the tobacco industry, and so forth, but we do
not extend this to scientific knowledge itself.
Politicians, corporations, and religious
institutions stand to benefit the most from
promoting anti-intellectualism. They enact the
politicization of non-partisan issues, polarizing
things like climate change so severely that simply
acknowledging basic science gets one ostracized.
This spills over into the social realm just as
easily. Anti-intellectualism breeds nationalism,
or the same blind allegiance to a governing body
that is actively sowing the seeds of division.
This is the reason for equating Black Lives
Matter or any other kind of social justice with
“fascism”, and the justification for this always
involves inventing violent intent out of thin air.
This in turn is used to justify a militarized
police force under the guise of protection.
And lastly, anti-intellectualism promotes
being skeptical towards perceived authority
while demanding that people blindly follow
demagogues who are amplified by social media.
People who fall into this way of thinking will
place an unreasonable level of skepticism on
the body of knowledge produced by tens of
thousands of scientists operating all over
the world under every type of government
and in both the public and private sector,
yet they place absolutely zero scrutiny on the
figures who confidently feed them the narratives
they enjoy, which are riddled with distortion and
fabrication almost without exception. These people
find comfort in the strength and confidence
such figures convey in an appeal to shared
beliefs. That’s why Trump famously stated that he
could shoot someone in the middle of fifth avenue
and he wouldn’t lose any voters. Because their
idolization of him is emotional, not logical.
In the end, and here comes Dave the broken record,
anti-science mentality and reality denial is the
single greatest threat facing mankind.
Take a movie like “Don’t Look Up”. Though
obviously satirical, the manner in which the
general public in this modern era would react to
any existential threat was depicted magnificently.
There is no issue that could be more non-partisan
than a comet coming to kill us all. And yet,
the comet was hyperpoliticized, people were
brainwashed into believing the comet didn’t exist,
and a megalomaniacal tech oligarch fucked us all.
In my estimation that is roughly what would happen
if there were another far deadlier pandemic or
some other such situation. And the culprit is
not the scientific community. It’s the pundits
and demagogues who abuse the power of the internet
to warp public perception of reality. People like
Rogan are not the main culprits but they also
are not blameless, and deserve their share of
criticism for amplifying the chaos for monetary
gain. And sadly, other than directly neutralizing
sources of disinformation and promoting general
science literacy, I don’t have a meaningful
solution to this doomsday recipe. I don’t know
how to fundamentally change human nature to
be either less corrupt and manipulative,
or less blindly credulous. I will admit,
my youthful optimism has been diminished as I
enter middle age. But I’m not giving up just yet.